---
layout: post
title: Lymelife
date: '2012-09-04T17:11:15-04:00'
tags:
- Movie Marathon
- lymelife
tumblr_url: http://reelmatt.com/post/30888603415/lymelife
---
Year 1, Day 66: Movie #67
BEFORE: As with the previous two films, these next two can be connected through the actor. In this case, it is Alec Baldwin, with today’s Lymelife.
THE PLOT: A family unit begins to bow under the pressure of a failing marriage.
AFTER: Independent films can be hit or miss for me. Since they aren’t big-budget, blockbuster films, they rely on the most fundamental aspect of filmmaking; telling a great story. An independent film relies on how good the story and the acting is because that’s pretty much all it has. There’s nothing wrong with that, it just means it has a higher barrier to entry most of the time since there isn’t that easy attraction that blockbusters have (read: action and energy).
Lymelife is about lyme disease. But it really is more about the relationships between the parents, kids, and friends. Both the writing and the acting portrayed what I felt were very realistic characters as opposed to Hollywood-style, compound characters. While I can’t directly connect with the events going on in the film, I felt they were still accessible to relate to.
So yeah, Lymelife was very entertaining and I thoroughly enjoyed watching it. While there wasn’t anything I particularly disliked about the film, I’m not giving it a full five stars because it wasn’t extraordinary. It was certainly well above average, but there wasn’t anything that made the film stand out as the best of the best.
RATING: 4 out of 5
