---
layout: post
title: Tag
image: https://m.media-amazon.com/images/M/MV5BNzk4NDM3NjkwNF5BMl5BanBnXkFtZTgwNTk5MzkzNTM@._V1_UX182_CR0,0,182,268_AL_.jpg
film: 614
plot: A small group of former classmates organize an elaborate, annual game of tag that requires some to travel all over the country.
rating: 4
tags:
- jeff tomsic
- ed helms
- jeremy renner
- jon hamm
- jake johnson
- hannibal buress
- annabelle wallis
- isla fisher
- rashida jones
- leslie bibb
- brian dennehy
- sebastian maniscalco
- lil rel howery
- thomas middleditch
---

#### THE REVIEW
As part of Father's Day weekend, my family all went to see *Tag* in a surprisingly small (five-row) theater, maybe a dozen or so people total. If I had to go based on the reactions of everyone in the theater as the movie was playing, my conclusion would be the jokes in *Tag* fell flat and was received as lukewarm. Not to worry though, because I did enough laughing to fill the entire theater.

I'm sure there are many things to critique about *Tag*. Even with whatever the opposite of a fine-tooth comb is, I could most definitely pick out a bunch of problems I had with the story, individual characters, or how everything ties together. Of those elements, the story is I think first on the chopping-block for riddled with problems. The ways in which the group of friends &mdash; Hoagie (Ed Helms), Bob Callahan (Jon Hamm), Chilli (Jake Johnson), Sable (Hannibal Buress), and Jerry (Jeremy Renner) &mdash; ratchets up the intensity with which they play their game of tag, the rules and amendments involved... thinking about the interplay of all that even for a while I'm sure there's lots of problems I could identify.

But instead, I found myself too busy laughing to bother myself with that mundane task. It's a comedy, the premise is (to me) inherently funny, so why wouldn't I laugh. The idea is to have a good time watching *Tag* a movie about a group of grown men would play the same game of tag for 30+ years. As was pointed out to me, I would be pre-laughing for most of the scenes, already dying in anticipation to what was about to happen. *Tag* is a wonderful blend of physical comedy and punchline jokes from stoner Chilli, up-tight businessman Bob Callahan, and paranoid Sable.

There's hints of *Tag* being akin to an adult *Home Alone*, a movie filled with silly pranks and traps, but the funnier asepct to *Tag* is that it's based on real life. And unlike other "based on a true story" films where you don't really know how much is made up (and shocker, I'm sure a lot was dramatized for this film as well), in the back of my head I was thinking at least a handful of these scenes must have actually happened. Sure enough, either right before or during the end credits, you see real-life footage of several of the elaborate tags that were pulled off, mimicking what we saw dramatized earlier. I think one of the reasons I found this movie so funny is because I could just imagine what seeing a group of men do this in real life would look like, and that imagination leads to some very funny moments. 

#### THE RATING
4 out of 5